If you start looking at cycling with thi 

Professional cycling remains something of a neo-con perfection and cyclists often stand as proof that the unlikey or the disanvantaged can forge their own fate. This 'self-made-success' story, one of neo-liberalism founding myths, is written large in competitive cycling, even though it has morphed into a almost exclusively middle-classs sport now. 

There is something fantasic about all this. The whole thing is secular religion and a commercial circus, 


romantic about all this. The great rivalries on the road over the decades, the bantam weight climbers levitating up great mountains, the long solo break aways brought to heel in the last 100 metres by the marauding bunch, the hardy riders bashing over the cobbles of Flanders.



The races were a lot more dangerous than they are today, being either incredibly long (the 600km Bordeax-Paris, the 1200km Paris-Brest-Paris) or very fast indeed as the practice of 'motor-pacing', or riding behind a motorbike, became popular on the track and road. 

Here's list of Bobby Walthour career injuries: 28 fractures of the right collarbone, 18 of the left, 32 broken ribs, and 60 stitches to his face and head. 



The early endurance races sprung from the strange notion that people might have free time to pursue something other than work and family. When Bill Cann rode 1060 miles around a track in 6 days in Islington in 1878 he started an age where the amateur athlete and the sports fan as interlocking ideas could exist. Both the saints and the faithful were created from the general rise in wealth and leisure time that came off the back of the Industrial Revolution.

In the ultimate game of 'if there isn't news then make it' L'Auto conjured the Tour de France out of thin air in 1903 to save its flagging circulation What better way than to write about the madness and rivallry of these riders pounding their single-speed bicycles across gravel roads. An early case of big media setting the agenda and similtanesouly creating a sport - and a market. 

Perhaps it's worth thinking of the great cyclists as the first secular saints of industrial society. And why do faithful need saints? Why do fans need stars?

We need stars as much as we need stories. 

We are creatures of empathy. Stories unite us.

So, we all join together in 






Before the new stars of cycling peddle past the waiting crowd at the Tour de France that same crowd has been assualted by a 20km long train of advertising vechicles, hundreds of dressed cars and trucks throwing mountains of cheap shitty plastic tat into the crowds. Many of the cycling teams are named after such glamorous things as floor tile companies (Quick-step) adn the State Lottery (FDJ) [more here for the curious](0http://inrng.com/2013/02/pro-team-sponsors/) culminating in the intellectual affront of Orica-Greenedge where Orica is a company that produces explosives for Austrlia's outrageously ravenous mining industry and Greededge the team name which is meant to stand for Austrailia (The green in the flag), having an edge, and Green as in protecting the environment. Really?

The Tour de France is about as Green as a Supertanker. Those two helicopters in the sky for 6 hours a day, hundreds of vechicles, hundreds of not-recyclable carbon bicycles, 42,000 bidons discarded on the side of the road, the ink in advertising materials, the endless thousands of zip-ties used to lash advertising to barriers for the two seconds they will be in shot. Then there's the institutional bias - the casual misogyny of the 'podium girls', the fact that women's cycling has a fraction of the prize money and no 'podium boys' to match (have the woman been asked if they want some?). It is a microcosm of the pure capitalist market and the 'diseqaulties' built into it.



And then there's the masochism. 




Back in Wellington circa 1984, 12,000 miles from Europe, I was still along way from being able to articulate any of this. I didn't see the Tour de France live on TV until many years later. I was still _reading_ about the greats in magazines. I had no conception of the long history of the sport, no idea that there was any other form of cycling that you could want to do beyond racing. I didn't really have much idea about anything much.

What I had learned was the golden rule, what Coppi said:

<blockquote>

 Cycling is suffering. 
 
 </blockquote>
 
 Beyond that I had learned that it is was an affordable and acceptable way to run away from home as often as possible. I learned that you can punish yourself very effectively on the bike for mistakes or perceived weaknesses that might have been your own, or other peoples. I learned that you can lessen a perception of being damaged by damaging yourself more. 
 
 This is perhaps the last most interesting thing about suffering and cycling. As well as being a great sport for egotists and sociopaths it's also a great sport for masochists. There are plenty of cyclists who are 'positive' and chase glory directly and honestly, but I am sure there are plenty more who unconsciously use it as a very sophisticated form of self-harm in a search for retribution. This is another story that we will come back to, the dance of mental-health and pain. 
 
 For now lets be content to note that suffering on the bike is fundemental to cycling and a deeply complex issue that is tied up with self-image, the need for acheivement and validation  - both for one's own sake and for the glory of the crowd - and a marker for the very human urge to transcend our earthly bounds and fly.
 
This is the final shared secret of cyclists - we all know there is suffering but there is something else that all cyclists beyond the casual get. It’s that thing that overtakes you, that means you have to watch yourself at dinner parties lest you start raving about your next big ride, that makes you think that having another bike cluttering up the house is a logical choice, that has you gazing at maps and building bicycles in your mind. 

And it’s a topic to leave for another day:

 _The Passion_.